We're going to continue our
discussion of Java Stream's
internals by discussing
the construction phase.
And this will be a
good way to get a sense
under the hood of what actually
happens when the Java Streams
framework is run.
How does it work at runtime?
How is a Java Stream
actually constructed?
And it's really
pretty interesting
to see how this works.
I think it'll also help
make some things more
clear about the laziness, for
example, of how Streams work.
So recall that intermediate
operations in a Stream
are lazy.
And what that means
is they actually
don't start to run until a
terminal operation is reached.
When the terminal
operation is reached,
then the wheels are
set into motion.
Let's take a look
at a simple example.
We've seen this before,
or some variant of this.
This example is going
to create a Stream
from a list of strings.
It's going to map each
string to be uppercase.
And then it goes
ahead and filters out
anything that
doesn't start with A.
It sorts everything
that starts with A,
and then it collects
the results into a list.
When this code runs at runtime,
those intermediate operations--
like stream(), map(), filter(),
and sort(), and so on--
actually don't do anything
until collect() is hit.
And instead what happens is,
as those methods are called,
at runtime, the
Streams framework
uses those methods to
build up a LinkedList
of Streams' source and
intermediate operations
into a LinkedList of nodes,
essentially, or stages.
And there's one node
in the LinkedList
for each stage in the pipeline.
So you could imagine
there'd be a LinkedList that
would start out saying
we've got a Stream
input from this source.
We've got map() with
this mapper function.
We've got filter()
with this predicate.
We have the sorted() method,
and so on and so forth.
And if you read the article
at the bottom of the page,
you'll see an example of
more description about what
happens here at runtime, and
I'm just basically visualizing
some of the text that's
in that particular link.
In the internal data
structure in that LinkedList,
each pipeline stage is described
by a bitmap of stream flags.
So if you think about the
nodes in the LinkedList,
each node would
correspond to a stage,
and there's certain
metadata that's associated
with each of the nodes.
And this is described by
a bitmap of stream flags.
And here are some of the
flags that can be set.
You can say that something is
going to have a sized flag,
and sized means that we
know the size of the Stream.
So for example,
if something comes
from a collection like a
list, we know how big it is.
In contrast, if it comes
from the iterate method,
we don't necessarily
know the size
because iterate could run
indefinitely and be unbounded.
Another flag might or might not
be set is the distinct flag.
That says that the
elements in the Stream
are expected to be distinct.
For example, if you have
a set, then those elements
are distinct, whereas if
we have an array list,
there's no reason that
they would be distinct.
Another property is whether or
not the elements in the Stream
are sorted, whether
we expect them
to be sorted in some order,
either ascending or descending.
And yet another flag is whether
or not Stream is ordered.
Ordered is not the
same as sorted.
Sorted really means
are they sort in some,
say, lexicographic
or numerical order.
Ordered simply means,
do the elements
appear in a meaningful
encounter order?
And encounter order
means just the order
that they show up in
the data structure.
So for example, a list
has an ordered property
because it's location 0,
location 1, location 2,
location 3, and so on, whereas
a hash map doesn't really
have any particular order.
These flags, by the way-- sized,
distinct, sorted, and ordered--
are essentially a subset
of the flags that can
be defined by a spliterator.
And if you take a look at the
spliterator implementations
in the Java Collections
framework, for example
you see that each data
structure, each collection,
that has a spliterator sets
certain flags that indicate
the same sorts of properties.
Is the collection ordered?
Is the collection sorted?
Is the collection distinct?
Is the collection sized?
And so on.
So these flags are very
similar to what you
would see with a spliterator.
Here are some examples of
characteristics of collections,
mapping them to
these various flags.
So for example, an
ArrayList is sized,
because we know how big
it is, and an ArrayList
is ordered, because it
has location 0, location
1, location 2, and so on.
But an ArrayList isn't
necessarily sorted
and an ArrayList isn't
necessarily distinct.
You could have duplicates
and they might not be sorted.
Conversely, a HashSet is
sized and it's also distinct,
because you can't have
duplicates in a set.
But it might not be ordered
because it's a HashSet,
and it might not be sorted
because it's a HashSet.
Finally, TreeSet is sized,
ordered, sorted, and distinct.
It has a size.
It has to have unique elements.
Since it's represented as
an ordered binary tree,
it's ordered-- or
sorry, sorted--
and it's also ordered, as well.
So that's one that has all the
kit and caboodles in there.
As I mentioned before, there
are some methods, like iterate
and generate, that are defined
on the Stream interface
that are not sized.
Each intermediate
operation in the Stream
may affect the flags that are
being defined at that stage.
So let's take a look
at some examples.
When the map()
operation is used,
that will clear the sorted and
distinct flags but it will keep
sized.
Remember, we talked about map().
We talked about how map() always
has the same number of elements
in the input Stream
as the output Stream?
And so it's sized.
But we don't really know
what map() is going to do.
The map() method doesn't know
what the behavior will do.
It might turn everything to 0.
It might turn them
to random numbers.
So we don't know
whether the result will
be sorted and distinct once
map is done with its behavior
processing.
Likewise, filter() will keep
sorted and keep distinct
because it doesn't
actually change the values.
So if they come in sorted,
they're going to go out sorted.
If they come in
distinct, they're
going to go out distinct.
However, it clears the sized
flag because of course,
the predicate may dictate you
end up with smaller number
of elements coming out
of filter() then went
into filter().
The sorted() method keeps sized
and distinct because as long
as sort's working correctly,
you're not going to end up with
more elements.
You're not going to end up
with changes in their values.
And it adds the sorted
flag, because again,
if sorted() works properly,
which it darn well better,
then we'll end up with sorted()
returning a sorted Stream,
so that flag will be set.
The flags at each stage
are updated as the pipeline
is being constructed.
So as the pipeline
of these things
is being constructed by the
runtime system at runtime,
as the code is executing,
these flags are being set.
And flags for a
previous stage can
be combined with the
current stage's behavior
to derive a new set of
flags for that stage.
And these flags can be
useful for various things.
Here's an example of
one way that the flags
can be used to optimize the
behavior of the program.
Let's assume, for
sake of argument,
that we create
ourselves a set that
is implemented as a TreeSet.
So we know that it's
sorted to start with.
And then let's assume
that we go ahead
and convert that
TreeSet into a Stream.
So now we have a Stream of
the elements in the TreeSet.
And then let's say we go ahead
and filter so that we only end
up with elements that
start with A. Well,
because of the fact that
the filter() operation
doesn't change the sorted flag,
we know it's still sorted.
So if somebody were to call the
sorted() method after calling
the filter() method
on a TreeSet,
the Streams framework
would realize,
sorted() is unnecessary.
There's no need
to use this thing.
This is already sorted.
And so as a result, it could
just eliminate that operation
altogether.
This is a little bit
akin to query optimizers
that you might be
familiar with if you've
done much database programming,
so same kind of thing.
The Streams framework
can use the semantics
of the different phases and
flags to do the processing
and optimize the
behavior of the program.